This bridge should not have been possible.
This is the Millau viaduct in France.
It is the tallest bridge in the world.
In fact all of Europe today there are only four
skyscrapers taller than it, the bridge
is even taller than the Eiffel Tower.
It soars 340 metres above the
Tarn valley for 2.4 kilometres.
For decades its critics said
it could never be built. When
it was finished it changed the map of
Europe and could be seen from space.
To build it, the deck had to slide
across seven enormous towers in a
technique that was so innovative,
they weren’t sure if it would work.
I was absolutely terrified. I was physically sick
with apprehension. Was it the right decision?
To celebrate the 20th anniversary of the bridge’s
opening we sat down with renowned architect Lord
Norman Foster in a special interview to trace
the viaduct’s journey from impossibility to icon.
It's an extraordinary fusion of talents
right across every aspect of society,
from the politicians through to the
extraordinary individuals who made it.
Lord Norman Foster is one today’s most
accomplished architects. You may know
some of his other projects:
the Gherkin, the Reichstag,
and nearly every famous Apple store,
including of course Apple Park.
His practice continues to define the
skylines of America, London, and Europe.
But it is this project that
may be his most breathtaking.
This is the bridge above the
clouds. The Millau viaduct.
France has a problem.
This is Massif Central. It is a beautiful,
rugged mountainous terrain that covers
about 15 percent of the country.
It also severs France in two.
These same gorges, rivers and forests make
it an incredibly hard landscape for anyone to
cross coming from the north to south of the
country, or from northern Europe to Spain.
For centuries this divided Europe and meant that
central France could not develop due to
a lack of adequate transportation links.
The roads and trainlines that did exist
were mostly single lane and would have to
dip and rise into these steep valleys,
or make massive detours. Many villages
did not have proper connections
to the outside world at all.
In the summer months those travelling from cities
like Paris to the south of France
would have to come through here.
This is Millau, a picturesque village
surrounded by beautiful countryside.
During this time it became the worst
bottleneck in Europe. The congestion
would add 5 hours to any journey and
extend 20 kilometres in both directions.
In the 1980s the French government wanted to solve
this problem. Massive freeways
were built through the region,
but the question remained: what to do about
the worst bottleneck. What to do about Millau?
Should the village be bypassed altogether? Should
a bridge be built over the Tarn river? But where?
Geologists and specialists worked for
years to figure out where on earth this
bridge could go. The valley was wide and steep
and prone to landslides. It was a nightmare.
Engineer Michel Virlogeux and his
team then had a lightbulb moment:
what if the road didn’t go into the valley at
all? What if the bridge went over it entirely?
It was an incredibly bold idea and something that
had never been done on such a scale before. The
French government thought Virlogeux was insane and
the bridge was put to rest… for the time being.
If it hadn’t been for the
success of another bridge,
a few hundred miles away, the Milau
Viaduct might never have happened.
Virlogeux was working on the Pont de Normandie
which was completed in 1994. It is an incredible
cable-stayed bridge that crosses the Seine right
before it empties into the ocean. Seeing this
bridge convinced the French government that the
Milau Viaduct might just be possible after all.
Virlogeux had one condition. If this bridge
was going to cross the Tarn Gorge it would
have to add to the landscape, not take away
from it. It would have to be beautiful.
This is where architect
Lord Norman Foster came in.
You only get one first impression. And
it was just a meeting of minds. I mean,
when we started to engage with each other
and talk about the idea of the competition.
it's rare that you engage with
somebody. And when you're talking
issues of structure or aesthetics that
you find you're on the same wavelength.
the chemistry was and is fantastic.
An international competition was held to decide on
the design for the bridge. It was not especially
common for architects to be involved in massive
national infrastructure projects like this.
Lord Foster would have to prove his worth.
I think it's very rare. I think the the government
agency that was tasked with
the idea of the competition
realised environmentally it was so
sensitive that there should be from
the outset a visual aesthetic
coupling to the engineering.
It was decided a cable-stayed bridge would be
chosen over other types of bridges, like a more
traditional suspension bridge. Cable-stayed
bridges are more efficient at carrying heavy
loads, and they can support a much more
slender deck so it’s much better to look at.
Everything about the viaduct was
to minimise its visual impact.
Lord Foster even reduced the number of piers
to seven from the nine that
Virlogeux initially proposed.
When it came time to present their design
to the jury the team decided to lead with
Lord Foster. This was very unusual
for a civil infrastructure project,
especially in France where engineers
are often more famous than architects.
Interestingly, the engineers in the team insisted
that I present the project. Now, obviously the
bridge is a work of engineering and I don't
pretend never could profess to be an engineer.
But the idea that I presented it perhaps came
out of the shared philosophy,to reinterpret
the bridge over the Tarn as being a bridge
connecting two plateaus across the entire valley.
celebrating the heroic proportions
of this great landscape valley,
that was really a philosophical
decision shared by all the team.
Foster and Virlogeux’s design
won hands down. They proposed
something more than just a bridge.
They proposed an extension of the
natural beauty of the valley itself. A
philosophical concept, not just a bridge.
I remember collaborating with Buckminster
Fuller for the last 12 years of his life,
and I remember him saying something like,
I never try and make something beautiful,
but at the end of the process, if it's
not beautiful, then somehow it's wrong.
Now the real work began.
Once plans for the bridge were officially
announced there was an outcry from locals
and environmentalists. Like Lord Foster,
many feared the natural beauty of the
landscape would be ruined by a colossal
bridge taller than the Eiffel Tower.
There were also fears that while the
bridge would assuage the bottleneck,
it could negatively affect the economy of Millau.
There was now more pressure on Foster
and Virlogeux than ever before.
This enormous, record breaking bridge
would also need to be invisible.
Managing any business can often
feel like an impossible task,
it may not be an invisible bridge taller
than any building in Europe, but that
doesn’t mean business owners
aren’t reaching for the sky.
That’s where today’s video sponsor Odoo can help.
To achieve your own impossible dream you’ll need
Oddo’s all-in-one management software
that can keep track of invoicing,
accounting, project management, inventory,
website creation and everything else.
Odoo’s CRM application is an extensive tool that
helps you manage all your business needs. With it,
you can easily track your leads, get accurate
forecasts, and most importantly close that sale.
Odoo’s communication and tracking
makes it easy to schedule calls,
meetings, to-do lists, mailings,
or sending out quotes to clients.
Both incoming emails and internal exchanges
are done from the same place as well so you
can access your entire decision
history at any time and not get
lost constantly searching your inbox for
that one piece of crucial information.
While integrated ChatGPT can help you
write emails when you’re in a rush.
The integrated analytics tool can also easily
track revenue forecasts and team performance,
so whether you're producing a YouTube
video or building one of the world’s
most iconic bridges you know exactly what
stage you’re at, and if you’re on budget.
The first application is free for
life, so why not try it today.
Now, let’s get back to the bridge in the clouds…
At this time, these piers would be taller
than any building in Europe, and they would
be sitting in open fields with no other structure
around them for scale, they would look even more
gigantic. To balance this, Lord Foster
wanted them to disappear into the sky.
The idea that the column is faceted and
is like a tuning fork and you can see
through it that was simultaneously visually
slimming it, but at the same time responding
to the expansion and contraction in
a more economic way. So performance,
economy, integrity, optimize
structure all go hand in hand.
The towers would get more slender as
they rose, dividing into two prongs,
more or less halving from 24 metres wide
at the bottom to 11 metres at the top.
While this is aesthetically pleasing
it served another purpose as well.
The Millau Viaduct had another
obstacle to being built: the wind.
Wind speeds could blow through the Tarn Gorge
at more than 130 miles an hour. The two prongs
in each of the piers allowed for the deck above
to move but be stable while the wind could pass
through the gaps. It also allowed for the deck to
expand and contract as metal does on warm days.
This was another example of the
harmonious relationship between
engineering and architecture
that this bridge required.
But there was a pressing issue that
kept Lord Foster awake at night:
what colour should the bridge be?
It sounds simple enough, but the
choice could make or break the
entire project. The viaduct couldn’t exactly
be bright red like the Golden Gate Bridge.
“That's not a cosmetic decision.
It has enormous visual impact.
“If you decide the landscape is
the protagonist is the main player,
then that will lead you to
doing those cables dark because.
“They would disappear into the
landscape, but they would be
dominant against the sky. If you make them
light. They would disappear into the sky.”
Lord Foster realised most people viewing the
viaduct would be looking at it from below,
either from the village or from the
deck as they drove across it. The
bridge would need to blend with the
sky. Not with the valley around it.
In the end he chose grey.
“I was absolutely terrified. I was physically
sick with apprehension. Was it the right
decision? It's binary. There's no halfway.”
Spacing the piers was its own challenge.
They would have to be equidistantly spaced,
but also structurally efficient,
buildable, and economical.
“There's a trade off between the cost of a
span because the longer the span generally,
the more expensive it becomes,
but then the shorter the span,
the more piers. And each pair has four deep
piles and each pier obviously has a cost.”
Excessively long spans would create difficulties
and extra costs when constructing the deck,
yet each pier represented a
massive cost in itself. In the end,
the team compromised with a span
of 342 metres in between each pier.
The piers, each one taller than a skyscraper,
then began their construction. GPS technology
was used to place each one. Project engineers
sunk these deep into the valley bedrock
and covered them with reinforced concrete.
The deck was made from hollow steel
and was prefabricated in sections
at the Eiffel factory at Alsace in
eastern France - yes, that Eiffel.
Each section was then floated down
the Rhine, to the Mediterranean,
to the French coast, and then driven
by road to the construction site.
The deck was then slid across the
completed towers using enormous
hydraulics that pushed them across
the valley a little bit every day.
They were launched simultaneously from both
sides over temporary structural supports.
During this time the weather
had to be closely monitored,
strong winds could damage the
deck before it reached the next
supporting tower as each “launching”
operation would take up to three days.
Even with the GPS technology it wasn’t
a certainty that the deck would meet
in the middle, the piers would line up,
or that the colour was the correct one.
“Whether it's a bridge or whether it's a
building, we now have more sophisticated
means of visualisations. I mean, I've just
come from a design session and I'm wearing
these goggles and I can see everything
three dimensionally. But the truth is,
until you actually see the real
thing, you really don't know.”
The day the two halves were due to meet was
a nervewracking one for everyone involved.
A champagne bottle was placed between the deck and
smashed in celebration when they met. In the end
it was with millimetre precision.
It was only now the architecture and engineering
teams could view their bridge
and see if it was a success.
“The relief. I can't. I can't tell you.
“It's only when you come on the approach road.
“Then wonderfully, you realize
it was the right decision.”
From the beginning Lord Foster did not want the
road to be a simple straight line. He
wanted it to curve over the valley,
so that as you drove across it you could
get a true sense of the bridge’s scale.
“It's on a 20 kilometre arc. And when you
drive over that bridge and it unfolds,
so you're seeing the alignment, you're seeing
the pillars disappearing in perspective.
“I think without question, it's
a more beautiful expression than
literally a one liner. There
is an extraordinary subtlety.
“The sides are transparent and it's very,
very difficult to find a bridge where you
can drive over and you can actually see,
you feel you’re on that shelf. So you've got all
the safety, all the protection. But you can see
across. So it's the closest you can get to fly
to when that is literally above the clouds.”
Far from destroying the economy of Millau,
the bridge became an instant icon and tourist
attraction in its own right. Visitors come
far and wide to see the bridge and the
village, but now there is no congestion.
“When I was last there, somebody came up to
me and said something along the lines of,
When you were doing this project, I protested.
“This individual said, I just want to tell you we
were wrong. You know, we just love this building
and everything that it's done for the community.
“I would like to think that the response,
the way in which it's almost a gravitational
magnetic pull where people want to come
see it from a distance, view it experience
to drive. I think in a way that's a kind
of vindication of the all the hard work.
“When you see it's like the tip of the
iceberg. What you don't see is all the
stages, all the long, hard work, long
hours that's gone into that process.”
The road opened up this area of France and changed
the map of Europe. Within three
years the bridge paid for itself.
The detour also saves around 40,000 tons of
CO2 emissions from heavy goods vehicles alone,
the equivalent of 40,000 trees
absorbing emissions over 40 years.
The viaduct illustrates, perhaps more
than any other, the importance of good
design and of the power of involving
architects in infrastructure projects.
That architects and engineers can achieve
remarkable things when working in harmony.
“It's really important to break down the barriers
between the different parties because in the end,
all of these things are in the public domain. And
in my experience, the more views, the better.”
Because of its beauty the bridge does
not detract from the landscape around it,
it only adds to it, and
elevates it to new heights.
“When you look at it. It's
not a work of architecture,
not a work of engineering.
It's a work of infrastructure.
“It transcends the function of just getting
from one side of a river to the other.
“It starts to take on a symbolic quality.
It becomes emblematic of the place.
“It's unique. You can't compare it with
anything else. I mean, you can talk about
buildings and you can say this building or that
building, but there's only one Millau Viaduct.
“Twenty years later it is
still just as breathtaking.”